hey YouTube I'm sitting out in my garden
and as promised I'm here to give you
some tips on growing great Tomatoes it
won't take you long to notice that my
garden is far from perfect yeah it's
pretty awesome I agree with that however
I was really tempted because I knew I
was gonna shoot this video to come down
here and pick off all the little lower
leaves that had white and tie everything
up and water everything really well so
it looked really great but instead I
decided to go with a more honest
approach
I've got 115 tomato plants of all kinds
of varieties in this garden and I
probably put a little more time into
them than a lot of people do however I
am NOT babysitting these plants I have
got six kids a whole herd full of goats
alive hobbies and one of those hobbies
is definitely growing tomatoes it's not
the only one so I would say I maintain
these tomato plants maybe just a little
bit above what your average person might
but by no means am I taking care of
these in any sort of way that is
unattainable to just see the average
grower I grew tomatoes for the first
time probably about 10 years ago in a
pot on my front porch it was just like a
hybrid plan I'd bought at the Home
Center put it in a plastic pot and when
the tomatoes came in which there weren't
a whole lot of them I was pretty
disappointed because the flavor wasn't
anything exceptional they tasted a lot
like what I was able to get at the store
fast forward a few years and I visited a
farmers market and whenever we were
still living in town and I got a little
container of these yellow cherry
tomatoes that quite literally changed my
life
they were amazing they were so sweet
they were so good I went back week after
week and bought these tomatoes from this
farmer and there were sungold
so it was the kind of little yellow
cherries and then like later I decided
I'll grow myself which I got the same
variety I put it in the ground and mine
didn't taste as good and I thought what
is going on here so wildly disappointed
with
that set me on the journey of doing a
lot of research and learning how do you
grow great Tomatoes so I'm really
excited to share with you guys some of
the things that I've learned when it
comes to growing great Tomatoes however
first I want to cover some basic tomato
vocabulary these are just some things
you may already know but you might not
so I'm just gonna go over really quick
some terms that you need to know when
talking about growing tomatoes first
let's talk about different sizes of
Tomatoes here we have what we call a
cherry tomato probably something that
most people are pretty familiar with in
your same classification on grape types
which just have a little bit more
elongated shape there are current
tomatoes which are teensy tiny little
things and there are pears which also
fall in the classification of a cherry
tomato the next size up from cherry
tomatoes or what we called salads or
salad it's these are generally 2 to 4
ounce fruits they're not large enough to
be constituted as slicers but they're
definitely more than one bite there are
pastes which are typically really meaty
varieties using for making sauces and
pastes they don't have a lot of seeds or
juice and there are slicers these big
Tomatoes often called beef steaks beef
steak actually originated as it's made a
variety and you can still buy yellow
beefsteak red beefsteak but at this
point that's kind of taken on the same
thing as like in the south when somebody
says hey do you want to coke it'll
actually mean do you want to coca-cola
they mean do you want any array of
carbonated beverage but it's kind of the
same thing with a beefsteak tomato
people say that but that originated as
an actual strand and now it's kind of
just taken over to be a word that's used
to describe those big meaty slicers that
we love so much for tomato sandwiches
there are two other words that come up a
lot when you're talking about tomato
varieties now it's determinate and
indeterminate now what that means
essentially is a determinate tomato
plant will just keep growing and growing
and growing as you can see this plant
here has reached the top of my trellis
which is quite a bit taller than me so
that plants like seven feet tall
that's an indeterminate tomato variety a
determinate tomato variety is often also
called a dwarf and they set a certain
and amount of fruit and they don't get
real tall you know they only they can
get just maybe up to a few feet tall and
they stopped growing and when they
stopped flowering and they stopped
setting for fruit it's kind of the same
difference between like a bush bean and
a pole bean your indeterminate tomatoes
are going to need some sort of support
and they will keep going and keep
producing as long as you continue to
give them support and keep them healthy
whereas a determinate tomato variety
generally has a shorter season it does
find with just maybe a steak some of
them don't even need any support but
they don't put off the same volume of
fruit as you would get from an
indeterminate now let's talk about that
number on your packet that says days 80
days 55 days 65 days what's it talking
about that that number is actually
talking about the days to maturity from
when you put your seedling in the garden
to when you have fruit it is not
referring to when you put the seed in
the ground it's referring to the
seedling in the garden obviously there's
a little bit of error in that because
you might put a you know three-week old
sealant seedling in the garden or you
might put a plant that's been growing
for two months it's already three feet
tall so it's kind of referring more to
like a young seedling we're not talking
about really mature plants then you have
to wait eighty days from when you
transplant them I know that I started
all of my plants in my greenhouse and
they got a pretty slow start around
mid-february here in Arkansas we had a
lot of overcast days and I started
harvesting my first tomatoes about the
second week of June the cherries came in
first and about a week-and-a-half close
to two weeks later the slicer started to
come in there are a couple terms that
you're probably completely familiar with
but you may not be entirely clear on and
that's heirloom and hybrid so what
constitutes an heirloom an heirloom seed
is a plant that has been handed down for
generations and generations they
generally have really cool stories and
they've got a history behind them
they're incredible especially if you
love stories another wonderful thing is
is they a very consistent flavor you
know what you're gonna get it's kind of
iffy on how old the particular type
maybe there are heirlooms that date back
into the 1700s but there are also
heirlooms that were developed by the
Heinz company for tomato sauce and you
know 60 or 70 years ago some people
agree that particular variety has to be
at least fifty years old to be
considered an heirloom some people say
it should be a hundred that's kind of up
in the air basically what you need to
know is that an heirloom tomato variety
has been bred through the years and
handed down generation after generation
and that particular plant has stayed the
same so what's a hybrid now a lot of
times we read about hybrids being bad
now don't freak out yet just hear me out
there are definitely some shady things
going on in big AG when it comes to
hybridization of plants there's another
classification of hybrids and there's
one term that makes all the difference
open pollination you have to understand
that by Nature the term hybrid it just
means cross I can make a hybrid here in
my garden by taking a couple of plants
and cross pollinating them and whatever
I got from that that mix of those two
heirloom parents it would be a hybrid
that would be an f1 hybrid so it's not
stabilized it takes it takes several
generations of breeding a plant in order
to get a stabilized hybrid but that's
how new varieties are made every single
heirloom in this garden came because
either on accident or on purpose
somebody crossed some plants so when you
go shopping for seeds understand
that what you're looking for and that is
the most important thing is that you're
looking for open pollinated varieties
which means that the seeds can be saved
therefore it is a sustainable plant I
have a philosophy when it comes to
farming and I apply it from everything
from tomatoes to my animals just all
across the board anything that I'm
trying to nurture could grow it said if
you want to grow something learn how it
grows without you you have to understand
what tomato plants that the way we grow
them which is to put them in the ground
have one start growing out stake them up
that's actually not how tomato plants
grow if you go drop a seed off in you
know the the yard and just let it go
you see all these little nubs that's
because tomato plants actually will grow
roots from every part of their stalk
that touches dirt because if you
understand when a plant is growing its
goal is not to make you the delicious
tomato sandwich its goal is to spread it
seed which means these plants grow into
massive things when allowed to sprawl
along the ground but the fruit is almost
always worthless by the time it gets to
the point that we want to eat it because
it's laying there on the ground and so
all kinds of critters come and and eat
the fruit they take the seed with them
leave them in their droppings the tomato
plants goal is reached but we don't get
any sandwiches out of it so what we do
my actually staking a tomato plant
making it grow up right so we can pick
the fruit at optimum ripeness is
completely against nature and that to me
it's very freeing to understand that
means that when things start to go wrong
it's just because I'm trying to make
that tomato plant do something that it
doesn't want to do it's not that I'm a
bad gardener so I just have to be on the
offensive and learning what it is
exactly that that plant needs to grow
against nature as effectively as
possible okay let's talk about some of
the things that can go wrong with your
tomato plants I did tell you that I was
going to be honest about my garden so
I'm going to show you some things that I
see right now that are problems and as
you can see I
shooting a YouTube video instead of
freaking out about these things so
clearly I'm not that worried about it
one of the things that you see is leaf
curl this just means your plant is
stressed and in this case my plants need
to be watered we have had very very hot
days I did not water yesterday because
we had just gotten rain but I will water
in the morning so I'm not freaking out
about it right now some of them are not
stressed out but some of them are really
starting to show some signs of stress
but it's okay there are all kinds of
issues that come in the form of wilts
and spots as you can see here now I
really don't have time today to go into
this in depth so I will tell you that
there is a little bit of that and it's
going to be a little bit normal but you
always want to keep an eye out for
plants that are wilting or showing a lot
of spotting because a lot of times you
can catch blight early on but really
there are a lot of pictures online and
any time that I've had stuff like that
come up you know I've searched I've
looked through it you can't always
troubleshoot it but I am going to tell
you a couple things that you can do to
try to keep your plants healthy one of
the very important factors in the health
of your tomato plant is spacing and and
the second is pruning now the big thing
that tomato plants need is they need to
be they need to not be left moist and
they need airflow which you know if
you're getting a lot of rain then a lot
of times if there's not airflow it can
Harbor a lot of moisture that's where
bacteria comes in and you get sick
plants a will sir oblige can knock your
tomato plants out really fast so airflow
is very important last year I planted my
plants way too close together and I did
not prune them and I lost all my tomato
plants pretty early on in the season
however you can see this year we've got
them spaced out 24 inches apart which is
still fairly close together but we have
pruned heavily you can see all the lower
branches have been snipped off and me
this particular plant is print to two
main vines here and that has made a
world of difference in the health
of these plants another thing is you do
not want to water your tomato plants
from overhead because of the fact that
they are so susceptible to funguses and
blights that is just asking for trouble
now obviously it's going to rain
you want it to rain and you can't
control that however be aware after you
get a heavy rain to come out make sure
there's air flue you know prune out some
branches if you need to so after the
rain is when the blight is the most
likely to set in if you're watering your
plants do it from the bottom soaker
hoses are your friends with tomatoes if
you're going to water come through and
water along the bottom of the plant to
try to avoid a bunch of water splashing
up or coming down from overhead mulching
is also very important with tomatoes
because it keeps water and any sort of
you know splash back from happening when
it does rain or when your plants are
being watered it helps keep keep this
lower area of the plants dry which is
the area that is most susceptible to
blight lower branches are pretty much
always always going to get sick on
Estimator plant as you can see here I've
got a couple that are hanging down and
they're starting to wilt these are just
it's just pretty typical here's a branch
that fell I'll tie that back up but as
you can see the parts that we're hanging
down starting to wilt wilt wilt this is
why you see so much of the bottom of our
plants is just completely print that is
the best way to keep your plants healthy
there's also just the reality that some
varieties are just more prone to
sickness than others you learn that
after growing them and that's why you
end up with favourites brandywine's are
actually one of the most popular tomato
varieties they have a huge following
people love them and they are
notoriously hard to keep healthy I've
got a couple brand new ones down on the
end they're already starting to show
some blight I might have to pull them
out halfway through the season but I
like them so I grow them anyway you just
tend to learn those things some
sometimes you can find descriptions when
you're buying your seeds people will say
you know this was really resilient I
didn't get any sickness out of it and
the other thing is is that's also going
to vary so much by your climate
I can tell you one of my favorite
tomatoes to grow is dr. which ease
yellow this thing is a beast
it grows big beautiful fruits this one's
pretty cat face we should tell you what
that means in a second but I don't deal
with a lot of blight in these I don't
deal with a lot of wilt I really like
dr. Richie another one that I'm growing
this year for the first time but I'm
really enjoying is called climbing
triple crop if you've been watching my
videos for a little while you've heard
me say quite a lot about it and I'm
starting to get a little bit of coloring
on the leaves where I think it might be
getting a little yucky but so far it's
produced so many big healthy fruits that
I will continue to grow it again and
again thank look at this tomato massive
ok let's talk about a couple of other
terms that you might hear or wonder
what's going on with your tomatoes
whenever you see it ok cat facing this
is something that you see that is very
typical of heirlooms and this is caused
by a ciated blossom they see any
blossoms are essentially where multiple
Savannah blossoms have fused together to
make one kind of super blossoms
now this can range anywhere from mild
like this one to extreme where you have
10 blossoms stuck together but what it
results in is cat-faced Tomatoes which
essentially is like malformation because
of having multiple Tomatoes fused
together now in and of itself it's
harmless you can still eat these however
these pockets where what would have been
the inside of the tomato is exposed and
hardened those can Harbor rot in a lot
of times what you end up with is a
really oddly shaped fruit that you have
to cut away a lot of your fruit probably
one of the most disappointing things in
tomato growing is seeing a bright red
fruit hanging on the vine your mouth
starts watering you go pick it and turn
it over just to discover that it has
blossom end rot blossom enright is
caused by lack of calcium in your
now a lot of terms that can be a calcium
deficiency in the soil which can be
remedied by putting things like
eggshells in your soil but that takes
almost a year to break down some people
suggest putting tums in your soil as a
quick calcium fix in case of emergency
I have tried that this year and I seem
to be doing better because this is one
of the plants that has blossom and rot
that did not get tums and most of the
ones that did get tums seem to be doing
well but that's still anecdotal I'm not
a hundred percent sure a lot of people
argue that the science of that is faulty
either way one thing that is agreed to
clump on across the board is that
blossom end rot can be caused by by over
watering because it keeps your plant
from being able to absorb the calcium so
this is another thing that's fixed by
moderate regular watering I don't have
any tomato hornworms to show you because
we hunt for ours at night by using a
backlight which absolutely does work
however I can show you here that there
damage is pretty recognized tomato
hornworms can wipe out a plant in just a
matter of a day or two you'll come
across a plant and you'll see long areas
where the branches are just completely
stripped of leaves the backlight tip has
been a lifesaver for my garden this year
even though you see here I still have a
little bit of hornworm damage because we
went a couple of days without diligently
checking for them we have been able to
avoid most of the crop loss that I have
experienced in years past because of
hormone another issue you may see on
your Tomatoes is cracking another thing
that can be pretty harmless but can also
cost you your fruit because again this
exposes the plant to places that may rot
and also it's not beautiful sometimes it
can cause places that are inedible a lot
of times like in this case it makes for
an ugly tomato but it's completely
edible because these areas have scabbed
over cracking is caused by too much
water or really more specifically too
much water too fast after not enough
water what I'm getting to is that
regular watering
is really important for your tomato
plants now sometimes it's gonna be out
of your control my tomato plants looks
awesome until about a week ago and we
got a ton of rain all at once and I'm
gonna be honest I wasn't complaining
about the rain because I was sick of
watering my garden however it did mess
up my tomatoes a little bit most of them
are still fine
the thing with tomatoes is is they
actually benefit from being watered
every few days really deeply rather than
a quick watering every day if you water
deep it actually allows your plants to
grow deeper roots which makes her
stronger plants the other thing is is it
helps tremendously when it comes to your
flavor you see I like to wait until my
plants show the first signs of stress
from being under water just barely leaf
curling now I wouldn't want to wait
until they were all wilted because then
when I watered my plants I would get
some serious cracking in the fruit
however a little bit of stress is
actually not a bad thing when it comes
to Tomatoes which brings me to the topic
of flavor
excuse the outfit change its actually
the next morning so let's talk about
flavor okay let's talk about how we
experience taste because that's a pretty
important thing to have a baseline for
if we're going to start talking about
growing for flavor now humans experience
taste in one of five ways they're
saltiness sweetness sourness bitterness
and umami that was named and discovered
by scientists in Tokyo in 1908 which we
would typically say savory that's what
Mommy is that's that experience of
savory taste now scientifically what
you're experiencing whenever you taste
umami is glutamates
most often which are high in foods like
brats smoked fish fermented foods and
ripe tomatoes it's actually what is
being mimicked whenever MSG is added to
food so ripe tomatoes are one of the
highest carriers of umami flavor knowing
exactly what makes tomatoes taste
certain ways means that in your growing
practices you can sometimes play on
those things and bring out the positive
flavors however there are some things
about different kinds of tomatoes that
are just genetic for instance red
tomatoes are typically higher in acid
therefore this is where you're going to
get your more intense and classic
tomatoey flavors reds and pinks yellows
and oranges however they are higher in
sugars and so this is where you get more
of your fruity floral and very sweet
notes black tomatoes which this one is
just a little bit under ripe so it looks
very green but even when they are right
a lot of times they have very green
shoulders black tomatoes things like
black creme paulrobinson
black from Tula these are higher in and
mommy so you're gonna have much more
savoring it so a lot of times people
describe them as smoky same things with
the blue and purple tomatoes that have
become popular in recent years now these
are colored by the presence of
anthocyanins that's what brings that
blue in some
it shows up in the leaves the fruits
that aren't exposed to the Sun are gonna
have more of that coloring and these are
also high in amami flavor so they are
more savory and often described as smoky
and they have more intense kind of acid
than that rather than sweetness of a Sun
Gold which would be a small yellow
cherry when it comes to tomato flavor
size absolutely matters now on a slicer
you're going to have way more meat to
seed pulp and skin ratio see inside the
pulp and the seed this is where most of
the glutamates are carried in your
tomato that's where our savoriness comes
from but also where most of the saponins
are carried now these are so quite
chemicals it's the reason why some
people experience cilantro very
differently from others so in your
cherry tomatoes that's why a lot of
times you bite one inside whoa that was
bitter or whoa that was a really really
savory and really really intense that's
because there's such a great ratio of
the pulp and seeds in this little guy
rather than here where there's way more
meat there for way more sugar one thing
that you'll be told whenever you start
growing tomatoes is nitrogen nitrogen
nitrogen if you go into the store
looking for any sort of tomato specific
fertilizer they're typically going to be
really high in nitrogen because that
does cause plants to grow big and
healthy and put off a lot of fruit but
the thing is is that if you over
nitrogen your plants it does take a hit
in the flavor and you end up with a
whole lot of fruit that doesn't have the
full potential of what its flavour could
be molasses is your friend when it comes
to fertilizing your Tomatoes put a few
tablespoons into a gallon of water pour
it along the soil you can put in a spray
bottle and spray the leaves which helps
them soak up those nutrients has a lot
of beneficial minerals and it's high in
potassium which offsets some of the
excess nitrogen you don't give up on
nitrogen your Tomatoes absolutely need
it but add in some molasses and what
that does is that raises the like pain
it helps with the sugars and it brings
you a better flavor to your to your crop
of tomatoes I mentioned earlier
a little bit of stress is not bad for
your plans actually it's very good for
your Tomatoes to experience a little bit
of stress that's because whenever your
plants are under attack or they're in a
situation where they go into essentially
survival mode it ramps up the production
of certain chemicals and in a lot of
cases these chemicals are the aromatics
the fragrances and the flavors that we
experience as being positive things so
if you go through and for instance spray
your tomato plants with an aspirin spray
it would be like one aspirin into an 8
ounce spray bottle you dissolve it in
there and go through and spray your
plants the soliloquy and mimics it's
actually a plant hormone and what it
does is it tricks your plants into
believing that they're under attack and
so they ramp up those chemicals to ward
off their attacker but really what
they're doing is backing your Tomatoes
full of amazing flavor not only does it
bump the flavor
it also pumps the nutrient content
vitamin C goes up really high and it
makes your plants stronger if they never
have any sort of stress they typically
are going to be more weak however
whenever you mimic this stress what
happens is you have a much stronger
plant and then if your plant actually
does get attacked by real bugs it's got
that the defense is already in place to
be able to ward them off another huge
factor in the flavor of your Tomatoes is
your watering practices unfortunately
over watering Tomatoes completely wrecks
their flavor if you've ever had a big
juicy tomato you couldn't wait to bite
into and whenever you tasted it it was
just completely watered down and
flavorless it probably came from either
too much watering or too much watering
recently the best time to harvest your
tomatoes is in the afternoon the hottest
time of the day when those sugars and
that tomato are going to be the most
concentrated and please for the love of
all that is tasty do you not get your
tomatoes in the refrigerator they
continue to develop the aromatic
compounds that cause their flavor for
days after they're picked off the vine
in fact some of their flavors are being
evaporated into the air so they continue
to develop those unless you put the
refrigerator in which is that's all of
it and their flavor tanks don't
refrigerate your Tomatoes they last for
a few days on the on the counter they do
continue to ripen so you do need to use
them but just use them when they're good
instead of putting them in the
refrigerator and making them taste like
store Tomatoes I really hope this helps
you guys grow the tomatoes of your
dreams until next time
[Music]